---
uid: cc49e5fb-5503-45c9-84db-13cfae15ae74
aliases: 
tags:
  - Courses
---
[(DevonThink) Assignment 2](x-devonthink-item://17D18655-B522-4271-93CE-94118D594815)  

## Problem 1

In class algorithm uses regret bound of $\leq 2 \sqrt{ T\ln N }$. Now consider this modified RWM algorithm. The game ends at time $\tau$ but we have no knowledge of it.
1. Initially $p_{i}^{t}=\frac{1}{N} \forall i \in X$
2. Let interval bound $T_{i}=2^{i}$. We start in the interval $T_{0} < t\leq T_{1}$
    1. In this interval, we set $\eta= \text{min}\left( \sqrt{\frac{ \ln N}{T_{i}} } ,\frac{1}{2}\right)$ 
    2. Then within this interval the regret $\leq 2 \sqrt{ T_{i}\ln N }$
3. Once we reach the end of this interval, we move onto the next interval.
4. We reach the end of the algorithm when time is $\tau$. We are in the interval $T_{k} < t <T_{k+1}$ where $k$ is the largest integer that satisfies $2^{k}\leq \tau$.
Now, the regret at this point can be obtained by summing all regret from previous and current intervals:
$$
\begin{align}
\text{Regret}  & \leq \sum_{i=1}^{k}2 \sqrt{ 2^{i}\ln N }  \\
 & \leq 2 \sqrt{ 2^{k+1}\ln N } \\
 & =2 \sqrt{ T_{k+1} \ln N }
\end{align}
$$
Thus we have regret bound $2\sqrt{ T_{k+1}\ln N }$ at time interval $\tau\leq T_{k+1}$. ^dx0aw7

## Problem 2



## Problem 3

This is formulated as the online prediction problem, with the seller having the option to choose a price $\frac{1}{k}, \frac{2}{k},\dots,\frac{k-1}{k}, \frac{k}{k}$ with the loss function what represents the foregone profit (that could have been captured).
$$
l_{i}^{t}=\begin{cases}
v_{i}-k  & \text{if sold, but at lower than willing to pay} \\
v_{i}  & \text{if not sold}
\end{cases}
$$
- Loss is zero when price is set to perfectly match the current buyer's willingness to pay.
Then, there are $n$ iterations of the game (since there are $n$ buyers), with $k$ different options for the seller. Thus the regret bound for a [[No-Regret Dynamics#^3d20c2|RWM]] Formulation of the game will be $\leq 2 \sqrt{ n \ln k }$.

## Problem 4


## Problem 5

### BNE
The utility of player $i$ is

$$
\mu_{i}=\begin{cases}
v_{i}-b_{i}  & \text{if gets item}\\
0  & \text{else}
\end{cases}
$$
Then, assume other person bids $b_{j}=\frac{v_{j}}{2}$ where $v_{j}\sim \text{Unif}(0,1)$. Then, to maximize their expected utility player $i$ will:
$$
\text{max}_{b_{i}}\mathbb{E}(\mu_{i})=\text{max}(v_{i}-b_{i})\cdot \underbrace{ \mathbb{P}\left( b_{i}>\frac{v_{j}}{2} \right) }_\text{ i's bid is greater }
$$
Where $\mathbb{P}\left( b_{i}> \frac{v_{j}}{2} \right)=2b_{i}$ since $v_{j}$ is a uniform distribution. Then solve the maximization problem:
$$
\text{max}_{b_{i}}(v_{i}-b_{i})2b_{i}
$$

Solving this problem will yield $b_{i}=\frac{v_{i}}{2}$. This is shown symmetrically for the other agent.

### Revenue
The revenue of the seller is
$$
\begin{align}
R & =\begin{cases}
\frac{v_{1}}{2}  & \text{given } v_{1}>v_{2} \\
\frac{v_{2}}{2}  & \text{given } v_{1}<v_{2} \\
\end{cases} \\

 \mathbb{E}(R)& =\mathbb{E}\left( \frac{v_{1}}{2}\mid v_{1}>v_{2} \right)+\mathbb{E}\left( \frac{v_{2}}{2}\mid v_{1}<v_{2} \right) \\
 & =2\cdot\int_{0}^{1} \frac{v_{1}}{2}\cdot \underbrace{ p(v_{1}|v_{1}>v_{2}) }_{ =\frac{f(v_{1}>v_{2}|v_{1})}{f(v_{1})}p(v_{1}>v_{2})=\frac{v_{1}}{2} }  \, dx  \\
 & =
\end{align}

$$
