---
layout: post
title:  "Why Be Productive?"
date:   2018-07-20 21:38 +0900
categories:
---

The journey to productivity is more often motivated by need than interest, as, one would arguably assume, *work is nobody’s favorite subject.* Yet, contrary to this obvious intuition, I find such systems deeply interesting, diving deeper than what would be practical. The kickstart of this journey was, even for me, out of necessity—but gradually I gained somewhat of an admiration of this *discipline* of *self-discipline*, as I often do with topics of such sorts. I hope to introduce my personal reason for such a choice, and outline a few actual techniques that I  implement, in hopes that it might aid anybody who shares my struggles.

My reasoning for wasting time on unnecessarily deep investigations on increasing efficiency (like this essay) is, somewhat ironically, to maximize *freedom*. Work should not interfere with my day when I occasionally want to stay in bed until noon, or take a long walk in the evening on a weekday. Disciplining yourself, therefore, would be equivalent to buying time for your future self; a way of allowing my future self to focus on what I *want*, rather than what I have to do. I sometimes fantasize a device that allows for saving and restoring time—one might decide to save an hour of commuting time (during which they would be unconscious), and later use it when necessary (stopping the world around them). Choosing to be productive is the closest we can approach this fantasy, as the problem of time management is always procrastination, and the issue with deadlines is not lack of time, but discipline.

If we were to suppose a future in which we could control time, it would not be far-fetched to assume that similar technologies would have freed us from mandatory labor. In an ideal world, nobody would be required to work—despite the talk of the “contributions to society,” or "giving back what you got,” meaningful contributions to humanity are driven not by money, but rather passion or interest—those who find meaning in creating, would continue to create regardless of whether they get something in return or not. Most jobs currently in existence will be automated in the near future (e.g. via machine learning or similar inventions) and therefore are far from contributions, and closer to maintenance. Critical roles in our economic or political system (i.e. government officials or bankers), are simply jobs that lubricate the gears that turn the wheels of society, and despite the importance and indispensability of such work in contemporary society, they do not offer advancements to humanity. Most contemporary work is subject to simple or complex physical mechanization, and as intellectual automation begins to permeate the world, most jobs—including those that form the crux of our intricate frameworks—would become meaningless. Freedom from labor, intellectual or physical, is, therefore, the ultimate goal of increasing productivity. The end goal isn’t to balance work, but rather to remove it.<sup>[[1]](#1)</sup>

Then what is meaningful work? This closely relates to my interpretation of freedom—when one is free to do whatever they want, then some, may that be a very small proportion, would choose to create. Creativity in not only the arts, but in all academic disciplines, increasing the database of human knowledge, and endlessly approaching a *truth*, however one might interpret such a concept. In any case, anybody would be able to pursue anything they want.

We can ignore the philosophical implications of such an ideal world, though, as we return to more practical implementations of productivity. The key to efficiency is minimalism—reducing the overhead in every task. This includes automating repetitive and dull tasks if possible (easier in computational tasks than physical ones)—such as stockpiling supplies or scripting workflows. Simplicity is crucial in maintaining efficiency, as (in my experience) our minds are not well-equipped for complexity greater than a certain threshold. This is not to be confused with visual complexity—a clean room can be efficient, but a dirty room in which its owner can easily locate everything is equally economical. Similar to one of the design goals of Apple’s redesign of iOS in 2013—“Bringing order to complexity”<sup>[[2]](#2)</sup>—the mental overhead, not the physical, is what needs reduction. If something, whether it be an idea, project, or an object, is unnecessary, throw it out. If it isn’t, organize it in within a system.

The system of organization is something one can be a bit more flexible about, as discovering what works for you appears to be more important than following a central dogma. I personally use the tools developed around a system called Getting Things Done<sup>[[3]](#3)</sup>, outlined in a book with the same name, but don’t follow its methodologies. The program is called Omnifocus, in which I collect any ideas or due tasks, which are then formatted and organized into subsections *called* Projects. Other features are minor conveniences, but the crucial part of any program, or even a paper-based system is the ability to capture every drifting idea, and then to organize and display them when needed. For example, if I were to think of a topic for a blog post, the task manager would be responsible for recording what I tell it about my thought, organizing it into the right projects (giving enough information), and displaying it when I sit down to write. This process is rather a popular one, and is outlined in a short and informative video from CrashCourse.

One must, however, be aware of the time cost for managing this system, relative to the cost of actually executing each task. This problem is a common and well documented occurrence<sup>[[4]](#4)</sup>. Another trap that can be more subtle, but equally dangerous, is that of endless self-improvement. That is, internalizing barriers in tasks, rather than identifying and addressing an external issue. An article about a more generalized version of this problem can be found in the link<sup>[[5]](#5)</sup>.

Increasing productivity can be a rewarding and interesting experience, given that one avoids the common pitfalls and misconceptions. I am still in the midst of altering my system or organization, and I do not see my journey ending quite soon yet, if ever.

The following is an additional list of minor but helpful mental models:
- If a task costs less than a threshold (e.g. 5 minutes), do it immediately
- A self-aware disciplinary task accomplished first in the morning effectively increases motivation for the rest of the day


<a name="1">[1]</a> CGPGrey. Humans Need Not Apply. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Pq-S557XQU. <br />
<a name="2">[2]</a> “Jony Ive Debuts iOS 7: ‘Bringing Order To Complexity’”. <br />
<a name="3">[3]</a> techcrunch.com/2013/06/11/jony-ives-debutes-ios-7-bringing-order-to-complexity/. <br />
<a name="4">[4]</a> Crash Course Efficiency <br />
<a name="5">[5]</a> XKCD. Efficiency. https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/efficiency.png. <br />
<a name="6">[6]</a> Improving Ourselves to Death. https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/01/15/improving-ourselves-to-death. <br />
