---
layout: post
title:  "Apple Rant"
date:   2018-08-22 13:16 +0900
categories:
---	

Apple may be one of, possibly the most controversial tech company in existence, at least among those who care. So there must be a reason why I self-identify as a proud user of Apple products. I own a MacBook Pro that is 4 years old now, an iPhone 5 and iPhone 6S, and frequent our family’s iPad Pro for my drawings with the overpriced Apple Pencil. I also recently purchased my AirPods which I, despite its admittedly awkward looks, treasure. On top of that, all of my accessories, including cases, adapters, and chargers, are all Apple-branded.

I was not completely sure or even aware of this phenomenon until recently, but a realization revealed that I happen to like their corporate philosophy, much more that I like their products. Of course, the politically correct opinion would be that “every brand has its advantages and drawbacks,” and “choosing the right tool” is much more important than who made it. But in this post, rather controversially, I would like to challenge that claim, and give a few reasons why I, personally, consider Apple products to be undoubtedly superior in most use cases, as well as my own speculation in why the company chooses to design in such a way. Most of the argument would be macOS and iOS, Apple’s desktop and mobile operating systems, respectively, against Windows and Android.

The most prominent advantage of being an Apple user is the consistency of its products. The app ecosystem for both macOS and iOS, as well as the behavior of most programs, are vastly more consistent and well-thought that their Windows and Android counterparts. The preferences menu, in most macOS apps, are located in the Menu bar > App name > Preferences; in Windows, they may well be in Options, Tools, or the “Other….” The shortcuts for opening this Preferences panel widely vary as well, compared to those in macOS, which is almost always, “Command + Comma.” Most apps adapt this behavior because this is what users expect—and following expectations is, contrary to what many developers might want, the best experience for the end user. Implementing new, creative ways to organize menu items, at the cost of certain, consistent actions—essentially betraying the user—is never a good experience, who simply wants to use, not understand, the app.

This consistency extends not only to their other software, but also to their hardware design. The material in iOS’s user interface (the Gaussian blur “frosted glass”) is equivalent to that of macOS, tvOS, and watchOS. All fonts are of the same family—“San Francisco,” which are used not only in the UI, but are engraved in each keyboard and backplane as model numbers and specs of MacBooks and iMacs. Every charging indicator, from the MagSafe indicator light to that of the AirPods, are orange when charging, and green when charged—not only the same color, but exactly the same hue.

The reason I consider this to be a significant advantage—which can admittedly be simply dismissed as unnecessary attention to detail at the cost of other significant features—is that it greatly reduces the mental overhead, because, as mentioned, it is expected behavior. I do not want to have to learn how each of my electronic devices turn on or shut down, neither do I want to dig through each menu incomprehensibly named “Preferences,” “Options,” or “Settings,” for the things that do the same things. Windows 10, for example, has “Control Center” and “Settings,” both of which hold system configurations, which changes their share of toggles every update. I do understand Microsoft is indeed trying to unify both into the Settings app, but the end user should never have to deal with that—they should never be expected to understand, but only to simply use.

The next point naturally follows—Apple’s reluctancy to cling onto legacy features for the sake of backwards compatibility—rather, their despite often being criticized, is one of their major advantages. I would not go far enough to call it “courage”—as Apple often does it its keynotes—but still, it is this willingness to dispose of legacy features that allows the company to design better UX. Prematurely removing flash on iPhones<sup>[[1]](#1)</sup>, Disregarding a physical keyboard when they introduced the first iPhone, removing the headphone jack in iPhone 7, and the home button in iPhone X, are are steps towards a more simplified, cognitively linnet user interface—as Jony Ive often denotes, their ideal iPhone would look be a touchable glass slab. I believe, with the most recent iteration, they have come remarkably close. As Youtuber Polymatter<sup>[[2]](#2)</sup> offers an interning viewpoint that, to the current Apple, technology is not their core—rather, it is merely that technology happens to be the method via which they deliver their end goal. This also explains Apple’s continuous focus on Accessibility features, as their end goal is not the product, but the user experience.

A frequently missed detail on Apple’s huge profit margins, as well as their fantastic integration between products, is vertical integration. The company often emphasizes the collaboration between their hardware and software teams in their keynotes—quoting Alan Kay: “People who are really serious about software should make their own hardware.”—but this is definitely not limited to them. Not only do they design each circuit and code each line of all their products, they also control the integrated cloud service, with a single account in which one can manage everything from their app subscription to warranty services, all within a single page, all your Music with iTunes and Apple Music, your television, with Apple TV and the iTunes Store, your cloud infrastructure, with CloudKit. This is their continuous onward march towards their supposed goal of “controlling key technologies”<sup>[[3]](#3)</sup>—indeed, in the recent years, they came to architecture their own CPU, and more recently GPU designs, and went on to implement them in an unprecedented integration with x86 (intel) CPUs and ARM chips on their recent macs. According to some reports, they are now aiming to manufacture their display technologies—separate from Samsung, their current supplier—and are experimenting with micro-LED technologies<sup>[[4]](#4)</sup>.

The result of this, despite of outcries of Apple “imprisoning” their customers in their own “walled garden,” is the absolutely perfect integration, demonstrated the more products you use in their hardware ecosystem. As you approach your desk, your Mac will recognize your Apple Watch to unlock itself, and then auto-switch the music source of your AirPods to your computer, and offer in the dock to open the email you were composing on your iPhone, and restore all the browser tabs in your safari, if you ask. The recent update allows you to right-click on a text cell, and allow you to choose a menu which will prompt your iPhone camera, and auto-insert the picture in place of the cursor. Despite its limits, a walled garden is still a garden.

The limits, however, which many Apple critics tend to offer, is very much misleading. If you are an “advanced user,” and Apple likes to say, that is familiar with the UNIX command line, you are free to customize your Mac in any way you like—Apple even offers a convenient package that lets you alter various system variables—“defaults”—and offers an open-source launch daemon—“launchd”—that users can configure fairly easily. Most apps come with AppleScript support, which which you can automate advance GUI tasks with ease, and with the 3rd-party package manager “brew,” almost all of the powerful open-source tools available in other *NIX systems can be installed with ease. The fact that many pseudo-tech enthusiasts, without a motivation to learn the almost universally accepted skill of the command line, fails to recognize its power of not only customization, but much more, reveals the fact that many of the criticisms regarding the customizability of macOS, is inherently flawed.

A point that is made, however, is that this power is limited to macOS. Within iOS it is impossible to customize more than Apple allows you to, which is very little, without jailbreaking—which seriously undermines many of the benefits, such as the security, of iOS. Despite this, however, there is a separate case to be made with iOS as well. The limitations of iOS, although seemingly absurd, is, in my opinion, a deliberate decision. iOS is a mobile operating system, aimed to run stable for very long periods of time, without regular shutdown or downtime. This requires its developers to remove as much bugs as possible, where a force reboot may not be a viable option, more so as phones become a necessity in daily life. Limiting user customization removes the probability of unexpected configurations crashing apps, or even the system. Apple’s tight control of its apps in iOS also reveals this intention—each app in the App Store is checked for potential problems in UX or unexpected behavior, and privacy concerns, by human app reviewers, contrary to, for example, the Google Play Store.

The focus shifts now to privacy, a political and moral topic concerning the whole industry, especially in light of the Snowden leaks, or the nonconsensual data collection by Facebook. Apple has aggressively advertised its pro-user-privacy stance since the controversy with the FBI<sup>[[5]](#5)</sup>, and despite many condemning it as a “marketing strategy,” Apple has genuine motivation—as for now—to promote the privacy of its user, mainly as most of its revenue originates from hardware, not software, and by extension, data collection.<sup>[[6]](#6)</sup> Their advocation is not only limited to words, however, as they were one of the first to introduce two-factor authentication with Apple IDs, and their continuous efforts in preventing advertiser tracking in Safari, as far as to chip design, in which they implemented a neural engine inside the SOC of the most recent iPhone—A11 Bionic—to process computationally intensive machine learning operations not in the cloud like others, but on-device. This limits their accuracy as well as their usefulness, but a contemporary convenience at the cost of unseen future compromises of your personal data, seems to be an unfair trade-off.

This leads nicely into the end of the rant, which, despite the ever-present feeling that I still haven’t expressed myself enough, I would like to stop here for now. I’m sure that I made myself clear enough as to why I appreciate their products. Whenever I purchase a device from Apple, I can be confident that it will be consistent and bind into the ecosystem of Apple products that I already have. I’m confident that I will not be faced with a load of minor inconveniences, and will be supported and usable a long time.

It is true that you need only the right tool for the job, if you know exactly what you are going to need; but just as Apple’s directions would suggest, you don’t know them yet. It should be up to the company to figure out the minor things that make a tool useful, or the potential problems users haven’t even considered to be important—consistent user interface, tight integration, chip design and app marketplace—all of which Apple bundles up and calls “user experience.” Unless Apple takes a radical shift in these areas, or a competitor with a significantly more appealing line of products and services, I won’t be leaving my walled garden soon.

<a name="1">[1]</a> Steve Jobs. <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Pq-S557XQU">Thoughts on Flash.</a><br />
<a name="2">[2]</a> Polymatter. <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zO0b-l-u7Yk">Grand Theory of Apple</a><br />
<a name="3">[3]</a> Business Insider. <a href="https://www.businessinsider.com/be-like-steve-own-your-key-technologies-2012-6">Be Like Steve - Own Your Key Technologies.</a><br />
<a name="4">[4]</a> The Verge. <a href="https://www.theverge.com/2018/3/19/17138240/apple-microled-facility-us-watch-oled">Apple using secret US facility to develop MicroLED screens for Apple Watch.</a><br />
<a name="5">[5]</a> Wikipedia. <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FBI–Apple_encryption_dispute ">FBI–Apple encryption dispute.</a> <br />
<a name="6">[6]</a> Statista. <a href="https://www.statista.com/statistics/382260/segments-share-revenue-of-apple/">Share of Apple's revenue by product category from the first quarter of 2012 to the third quarter of 2018.</a><br />

