---
layout: post
title:  "Virtual Reality"
date:   2018-07-25 21:00 +0900
categories:
---

My vision with computer science starts with, rather anti-climactically, with a children’s book about Chemistry.

Part of the famous “Why?” Book-length cartoon series in Korea, the story introduced difficult chemistry concepts in a digestible children’s book. The writers, in an attempt to make the book realistic and easier to plot, set the characters in a virtual reality game, where the laws of physics, (and ironically chemistry as well) could easily be bent to facilitate explanation.

As I learn more, academically, socially (or in that matter in any sense), I keep reiterating back to this imaginary world. The world, as it turns out to a depressed 8th-grader, was not a nice, cozy, neat, organized place designed for me and my friends, but a messy competition, blinded and handicapped, with the sole thread of knowledge and probability, to hang on to.

This was, as I observed, not out of intension, but out of inevitability. More people strive to be better, either out of pure selflessness or a selfish desire of self-worth. Immorality, as I view it, is a result of the flaws in the system designed to handle these interactions. These systems are inevitably built upon a physical foundation, constrained by the laws of physics, and requires heavy maintenance. Meetings need to be scheduled according to time zones, conversations cannot continue with people in different circadian rhythms, a romantic date will likely fail without a beautiful restaurant or on other sides of the world. Economies are strung by the rapid development of technology and more recently, intellectual automation, and are failing to transparently expose or fix the problems with economic crises, or the near-future result of massive unemployment, or more personally, inflation of academic or experience requirements, without it being anyone’s fault but the system’s.

Yet, I do see hope in many cases. The open source initiative, where programmers are voluntarily helping to develop complex programs, a community like reddit withstanding being plagued by the normal problems of social services, and the fact that these organizations and systems are capable of sustaining themselves, project a faraway, but hopeful future, where the best of humanity’s traits can shine. A technological utopia, where logistical problems are a thing of the past, and ideas and relationships can flow and prosper.

The problems we see now, are remnants of the inevitable system of the past—just like the first books that emerged decades after the printing press was invented, we are not yet taking advantage of the accelerating technological advances of the last decade. But we do see some, advancing into and building this future, such as blockchain, machine learning, and virtual reality.	

In a virtual universe, a world can be built from scratch. A new economic system can be tested simply with a change of code, or time zones can be eliminated, or rather, will not exist in the first place. Physical distance doesn’t mean anything anymore—people can be teleported, or with a more intuitive user interface where one may just be able to think to move—or fly, or swim, or perform any other means of movement they desire. If we can parse thought, why, then, limit ourselves to our primitive bodies designed for survival? A virtualized projection of oneself can take any form, one can choose to be any animal, a robot, or anything that suits their desires—but there will be always some who choose to remain in our human forms. New forms of communication will form, and nobody will be far away from anybody else. Most problems of the world, at the very least, the physical ones, will be solved.

This is, of course, a far-fetched daydream. The logistics of getting us into this future, will be hindered more by economics and finance than technology. Then after by ethics, and philosophy and psychology and sociology. And then there are the practical problems in implementing the code—who designs how the world should work? Massive, multiple year-long public debates need to take place on designing and publishing the work, and when an opposition team decides to fork the brach and start a new world with different rules, the project itself will lose its purpose, as the self-aware users, us, are what ultimately gives any universe meaning.

This is a pleasant thought experiment for most, but for me, it is life-long dream. When I code, contribute to an open-source initiative, or experiment with hosting my website; when I learn a new concept in economics, thinking about how this system could be generalized and implemented if there were no physical hinderance—above a certain abstraction, or more likely anything abstracted upon the natural sciences—sociology, psychology, economics, history—are subject to this consideration—how will this work without rules? If we could make this better, why? It is not only a useful mental model, but a consideration of the pure mechanics of the subject—the reason this subject exists, and is studied by humanity’s greatest minds. And it frees us from the practical consideration—if a new idea emerges, one no longer has to dismiss it as impractical or infeasible to replace, but can develop it further. Ideas will no longer be judged by its physical viability, but by its intrinsic value.

The connected world that we live in is currently a reflected version of our real world—the familiar desktop interface, the mouse, the “web,” or even the word “web-site” merely represents a physical object. When we are willing to detach from this physical world, however, those metaphors can become real, no longer reflections. We will, then finally, drop the word virtual, and live in our own versions of reality.

